2017


AP Calculus AB
Free-Response Questions


© 2017 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo
are registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.

2017 AP® CALCULUS AB FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS

CALCULUS AB

SECTION II, Part A

Time—30 minutes

Number of questions—2

A GRAPHING CALCULATOR IS REQUIRED FOR THESE QUESTIONS.

1.	 A tank has a height of 10 feet. The area of the horizontal cross section of the tank at height h feet is given by
the function A, where A(h) is measured in square feet. The function A is continuous and decreases as h
increases. Selected values for A(h) are given in the table above.
(a) Use a left Riemann sum with the three subintervals indicated by the data in the table to approximate the
volume of the tank. Indicate units of measure.
(b) Does the approximation in part (a) overestimate or underestimate the volume of the tank? Explain your
reasoning.
(c)	 The area, in square feet, of the horizontal cross section at height h feet is modeled by the function f given

50.3
. Based on this model, find the volume of the tank. Indicate units of measure.
by f (h) = 0.2h
e
+h
(d) Water is pumped into the tank. When the height of the water is 5 feet, the height is increasing at the rate
of 0.26 foot per minute. Using the model from part (c), find the rate at which the volume of water is
changing with respect to time when the height of the water is 5 feet. Indicate units of measure.


© 2017 The College Board.
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
-2-

2017 AP® CALCULUS AB FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS

2.	 When a certain grocery store opens, it has 50 pounds of bananas on a display table. Customers remove
bananas from the display table at a rate modeled by

⎛ t3 ⎞
⎟⎟
f (t ) = 10 + (0.8t)sin ⎜⎜⎜
⎟ for 0 < t £ 12,
⎝⎜ 100 ⎟⎠⎟
where f (t ) is measured in pounds per hour and t is the number of hours after the store opened. After the
store has been open for three hours, store employees add bananas to the display table at a rate modeled by

(

)

g(t ) = 3 + 2.4 ln t 2 + 2t for 3 < t £ 12,
where g(t ) is measured in pounds per hour and t is the number of hours after the store opened.
(a) How many pounds of bananas are removed from the display table during the first 2 hours the store is
open?
(b)	 Find f ¢(7).	 Using correct units, explain the meaning of f ¢(7) in the context of the problem.
(c) Is the number of pounds of bananas on the display table increasing or decreasing at time t = 5 ? Give a
reason for your answer.
(d)	 How many pounds of bananas are on the display table at time t = 8 ?


END OF PART A OF SECTION II 


© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
-3-

2017 AP® CALCULUS AB FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS

CALCULUS AB
SECTION II, Part B
Time—1 hour

Number of questions—4

NO CALCULATOR IS ALLOWED FOR THESE QUESTIONS.


3. The function f is differentiable on the closed interval [−6, 5] and satisfies f (− 2) = 7. The graph of f ¢ , the
derivative of f, consists of a semicircle and three line segments, as shown in the figure above.
(a) Find the values of f (− 6) and f (5).
(b) On what intervals is f increasing? Justify your answer.
(c) Find the absolute minimum value of f on the closed interval [−6, 5] . Justify your answer.
(d) For each of f ≤(− 5) and f ≤(3), find the value or explain why it does not exist.


© 2017 The College Board.
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
-4-

2017 AP® CALCULUS AB FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS

4. At time t = 0, a boiled potato is taken from a pot on a stove and left to cool in a kitchen. The internal
temperature of the potato is 91 degrees Celsius (°C) at time t = 0, and the internal temperature of the potato
is greater than 27 °C for all times t > 0. The internal temperature of the potato at time t minutes can be
modeled by the function H that satisfies the differential equation

dH
1
= − (H − 27), where H (t) is
dt
4

measured in degrees Celsius and H(0) = 91.

(a) Write an equation for the line tangent to the graph of H at t = 0. Use this equation to approximate the
internal temperature of the potato at time t = 3.
(b) Use

d 2H
dt 2

to determine whether your answer in part (a) is an underestimate or an overestimate of the

internal temperature of the potato at time t = 3.
(c) For t < 10, an alternate model for the internal temperature of the potato at time t minutes is the function
G that satisfies the differential equation

dG
= −(G − 27)2 / 3, where G(t) is measured in degrees Celsius
dt

and G(0) = 91. Find an expression for G(t ). Based on this model, what is the internal temperature of the
potato at time t = 3 ?


© 2017 The College Board.
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
-5-

2017 AP® CALCULUS AB FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS

5. Two particles move along the x-axis. For 0 £ t £ 8 , the position of particle P at time t is given by

(

)

xP (t ) = ln t 2 − 2t + 10 , while the velocity of particle Q at time t is given by vQ
(t ) = t 2 − 8t + 15.
Particle Q is at position x = 5 at time t = 0.

(a) For 0 £ t £ 8 , when is particle P moving to the left?
(b) For 0 £ t £ 8 , find all times t during which the two particles travel in the same direction.
(c) Find the acceleration of particle Q at time t = 2. Is the speed of particle Q increasing, decreasing, or
neither at time t = 2 ? Explain your reasoning.
(d) Find the position of particle Q the first time it changes direction.


© 2017 The College Board.
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
-6-

2017 AP® CALCULUS AB FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS

6. Let f be the function defined by f (x) = cos (2 x) + e sin x.
Let g be a differentiable function. The table above gives values of g and its derivative g¢ at selected values
of x.
Let h be the function whose graph, consisting of five line segments, is shown in the figure above.
(a) Find the slope of the line tangent to the graph of f at x = p .
(b) Let k be the function defined by k (x) = h( f (x)). Find k ¢(p ).

◊

(c) Let m be the function defined by m(x) = g(−2x) h(x). Find m¢(2).
(d) Is there a number c in the closed interval [− 5, − 3] such that g ¢(c) = − 4 ? Justify your answer.


STOP

END OF EXAM


© 2017 The College Board.
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.

-7-


